Document Cosmos changes in 9.0 (#4812)
dotnet/EntityFramework.Docs: entity-framework/core/providers/cosmos/modeling.md

---
title: Modeling - Azure Cosmos DB Provider - EF Core
description: Configuring the model with the Azure Cosmos DB EF Core Provider
author: roji
ms.date: 09/19/2024
uid: core/providers/cosmos/modeling
---
# Configuring the model with the EF Core Azure Cosmos DB Provider

## Containers and entity types

In Azure Cosmos DB, JSON documents are stored in containers. Unlike tables in relational databases, Cosmos DB containers can contain documents with different shapes - a container does not impose a uniform schema on its documents. However, various configuration options are defined at the container level, and therefore affect all documents contained within it. See the [Cosmos DB documentation on containers](/azure/cosmos-db/resource-model) for more information.

> By default, EF maps all entity types to the same container; this is usually a good default in terms of performance and pricing. The default container is named after the your .NET context type (`OrderContext` in this case). To change the default container name, use <xref:Microsoft.EntityFrameworkCore.CosmosModelBuilderExtensions.HasDefaultContainer%2A>:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, EF maps all entity types to the same container; this is usually a good default in terms of performance and pricing. The default container is named after the .NET context type (`OrderContext` in this case). To change the default container name, use <xref:Microsoft.EntityFrameworkCore.CosmosModelBuilderExtensions.HasDefaultContainer%2A>:
```

## IDs and keys

Cosmos DB requires all documents to have an `id` JSON property which uniquely identifies them. Like other EF providers, the EF Cosmos provider will attempt to find a property named `Id` or `<type name>Id`, and configure that property as the key of your entity type, mapping it to the `id` JSON property. You can configure any property to be the key property by using <xref:Microsoft.EntityFrameworkCore.Metadata.Builders.EntityTypeBuilder%601.HasKey%2A>; see [the general EF documentation on keys](xref:core/modeling/keys) for more information.

Developers coming to Cosmos DB from other database sometimes expect the key (`Id`) property to be generated automatically. For example, on SQL Server, EF configures numeric key properties to be IDENTITY columns, where auto-incrementing values are generated in the database. In contrast, Cosmos DB does not support automatic generation of properties, and so key properties must be explicitly set. Inserting an entity type with an unset key property will simply insert the CLR default value for that property (e.g. 0 for `int`), and a second insert will fail; EF issues a warning if you attempt to do this.

> If you'd like to have a GUID as your key property, you can configure EF to generate random values at the client:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you'd like to have a GUID as your key property, you can configure EF to generate unique values at the client:
```

Author: Changing to "unique, random values" to make it clear that it's random (and e.g. not some sort of sequential thing)

The discriminator property name and values can be configured with the standard EF APIs, [see these docs for more information](xref:core/modeling/inheritance). If you're mapping a single entity type to a container, are confident that you'll never be mapping another one, and would like to get rid of the discriminator property, call [HasNoDiscriminator](/dotnet/api/Microsoft.EntityFrameworkCore.Metadata.Builders.EntityTypeBuilder.HasNoDiscriminator):

```csharp
modelBuilder.Entity<Order>().HasNoDiscriminator();
```

> Since the same container can contain entity types of different types, and the JSON `id` property must be unique within a container partition, you cannot have the same `id` value for entities of different types in the same container partition. Compare this to relational databases, where each entity type is mapped to a different table, and therefore has its own, separate key space. It is therefore your responsibility to ensure the `id` uniqueness of documents you insert into a container. If you need to have different entity types with the same `id` values, you can instruct EF to automatically insert the discriminator into the `id` property as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since the same container can contain entity types of different types, and the JSON `id` property must be unique within a container partition, you cannot have the same `id` value for entities of different types in the same container partition. Compare this to relational databases, where each entity type is mapped to a different table, and therefore has its own, separate key space. It is therefore your responsibility to ensure the `id` uniqueness of documents you insert into a container. If you need to have different entity types with the same primary key values, you can instruct EF to automatically insert the discriminator into the `id` property as follows:
```

```csharp
modelBuilder.Entity<Session>().HasDiscriminatorInJsonId();
```

While this may make it easier to work with `id` values, it may make it harder to interoperate with external applications working with your documents, as they now must be aware of EF's concatenated `id` format, as well as the discriminator values, which are by default derived from your .NET types. Note that this was the default behavior prior to EF 9.0.

An additional option is to instruct EF to insert only the _root discriminator_, which is the discriminator of the root entity type of the hierarchy, into the `id` property:

```csharp
modelBuilder.Entity<Session>().HasRootDiscriminatorInJsonId();
```

This is similar, but allows EF to use efficient [point reads](xref:core/providers/cosmos/querying#point-reads) in more scenarios. If you need to insert a discriminator into the `id` property, consider inserting the root discriminator for better performance.

> ## Partition keys

Reviewer: Move these two sections up and mention that if the PK is discovered by a convention, then the partition key properties will be added to it

<!--
modelBuilder.HasManualThroughput(2000);
modelBuilder.HasAutoscaleThroughput(4000);
-->
[!code-csharp[ModelThroughput](../../../../samples/core/Miscellaneous/NewInEFCore6.Cosmos/CosmosModelConfigurationSample.cs?name=ModelThroughput)]

To configure provisioned throughput for a container call <xref:Microsoft.EntityFrameworkCore.CosmosEntityTypeBuilderExtensions.HasAutoscaleThroughput%2A?displayProperty=nameWithType> or <xref:Microsoft.EntityFrameworkCore.CosmosEntityTypeBuilderExtensions.HasManualThroughput%2A?displayProperty=nameWithType>. For example:

<!--
modelBuilder.Entity<Family>(
    entityTypeBuilder =>
    {
        entityTypeBuilder.HasManualThroughput(5000);
        entityTypeBuilder.HasAutoscaleThroughput(3000);
    });
-->
[!code-csharp[EntityTypeThroughput](../../../../samples/core/Miscellaneous/NewInEFCore6.Cosmos/CosmosModelConfigurationSample.cs?name=EntityTypeThroughput)]

## Time-to-live

> Entity types in the Azure Cosmos DB model can now be configured with a default time-to-live. For example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Entity types in the Azure Cosmos DB model can be configured with a default time-to-live. For example:
```

[!code-csharp[ImpliedProperties](../../../../samples/core/Cosmos/ModelBuilding/Sample.cs?name=ImpliedProperties)]

> [!TIP]
> When necessary the default primary key for the owned entity types can be changed, but then key values should be provided explicitly.

### Collections of primitive types

Collections of supported primitive types, such as `string` and `int`, are discovered and mapped automatically. Supported collections are all types that implement <xref:System.Collections.Generic.IReadOnlyList%601> or <xref:System.Collections.Generic.IReadOnlyDictionary%602>. For example, consider this entity type:

<!--
public class Book
{
    public Guid Id { get; set; }
    public string Title { get; set; }
    public IList<string> Quotes { get; set; }
    public IDictionary<string, string> Notes { get; set; }
}
-->
[!code-csharp[BookEntity](../../../../samples/core/Miscellaneous/NewInEFCore6.Cosmos/CosmosPrimitiveTypesSample.cs?name=BookEntity)]

> Both the list and the dictionary can be populated and inserted into the database in the normal way:

Reviewer: Prevent the names from being localized:
```suggestion
The `IList` and the `IDictionary` can be populated and persisted to the database:
```
